---
layout: post
title: Data Bags are a Code Smell
---

## What are Bags?

Chef-server offers an API for "data bags". These are mostly unstructured JSON
data with a strict two-level hierarchy:

    bag1/
      item1
      item2
    bag2/
      item1
      item2

Both bags and items offer basic CRUD operations, and items can be used with
Chef's search API so you can do simple key/value queries.

This is commonly used, and indeed considered by most to be a best-practice, for
storing data that doesn't map one-to-one with nodes. For example, having a bag
calls `users` with one item for each of your system users with keys like
`name` and `ssh_keys`. You can then write a single Chef recipe to loop over
each item in the bag and create their user account, populate `authorized_keys`,
and so on.

## So what is the problem?

The data bags (hereafter: bags) system has two main use cases in my experience.
The first is the one mentioned above, storing structured data as files in git
and then using it in as recipe. The thing is, we already have that, they are
just called cookbooks. Storing the data separately as JSON files which you
manage in Git and then upload them to the bags API, and then do the exact same
dance for the cookbook that consumes them is just more work for little gain.

A simpler solution is to use resources and recipes like with anything else in
Chef. Each item maps to a single resource, and each bag to a recipe. The code
used to process each bag can either go in an LWRP or a class-based resource.
This means we get all the benefits of cookbook versioning as well as fewer
moving pieces and a unified workflow. What do we lose? We can't use JSON-based
tools to process our user data and we can't use Chef search on it. Most users
don't use either of these features, so this is not generally a significant
downside.

The second use case is using the bags API as a simple database. An example would
be storing which version of your application to deploy and updating that from
Jenkins or similar. Unfortunately the Chef API is very susceptible to race
conditions when you have multiple writers/updaters. At the first Chef community
summit we discussed some additions to the API to improve this, but nothing has
materialized so far. If you need a simple database like this, you are probably
better off building a small API service with Flask/Sinatra/Express that provides
the semantics you need. ZooKeeper and Etcd are also options, though that rabbit
hole goes very deep and may be more complex than you need.

## What about encrypted data bags?

Added a few years ago, encrypted data bags offer a limited way to store secret
information in a data bag without the server being able to read it. Unfortunately
secrets management is a very hard problem and encrypted bags only address a very
specific attack vector. If you are using Hosted Enterprise Chef and you want to
store something like database connection information in a bag (though I hope
after reading this that you won't) then you don't want a compromise of Hosted Chef
to leak your database passwords and other secrets. For this case, encrypted bags
protect you from Chef Inc and vice versa.

For this to work you need to distribute a decryption key to every machine that
has to read encrypted data. This means you _must_ have a system in place to
distribute secrets to all your servers, so why not just use that to distribute
the original secret data and skip the whole bag thing?

Secrets management is easily worthy of its own
post but a tl;dr is that we at Balanced are using [S3 via the citadel cookbook](https://github.com/balanced-cookbooks/citadel)
with a close eye on [Barbican](https://github.com/cloudkeep/barbican) and [Red October](https://github.com/cloudflare/redoctober).
You could also do worse than [chef-vault](https://github.com/Nordstrom/chef-vault)
though it is based around bags at heart so shares many of the same issues.

## So I should just use resources for everything?

In most cases, yes. There are some more advanced uses for bags like using the
same bag in two difference recipes which can solved by inverting things
(build a new resource that handles both of the things you want to do with the
data) but this doesn't always work out cleanly. Another option is to make a
recipe that simply stores the data in `node.run_state` and then process it
exactly as you would with a bag in the other recipes.

Overall though, yes, take the code you used to have inside the loop which processed
your bag and build a resource (LWRP or class-based), and then use that in a recipe.

## How do I rewrite my recipe?

Let's start with a users bag item like:

{% highlight json %}
{
  "id": "asmithee",
  "comment": "Alan Smithee",
  "ssh_keys": ["ssh-rsa ..."]
}
{% endhighlight %}

Our current recipe looks like:

{% highlight ruby %}
search(:users, '*:*').each do |u|
  user u['id'] do
    comment u['comment']
    supports manage_home: true
  end

  directory "/home/#{u['id']}/.ssh" do
    owner u['id']
  end

  file "/home/#{u['id']}/.ssh/authorized_keys" do
    owner u['id']
    mode '644'
    content u['ssh_keys'].join("\n")
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

So in short, for each user, we create the user account, create a .ssh folder, and
create an authorized_keys file.

To converge this to being resource-based, lets create a `mycompany_user` LWRP:

{% highlight ruby %}
# resources/default.rb
default_action(:create)

attribute(:comment)
attribute(:ssh_keys)


# providers/default.rb
action :create do
  user new_resource.name do
    comment new_resource.comment
    supports manage_home: true
  end

  directory "/home/#{new_resource.name}/.ssh" do
    owner new_resource.name
  end

  file "/home/#{new_resource.name}/.ssh/authorized_keys" do
    owner new_resource.name
    mode '644'
    content new_resource.ssh_keys.join("\n")
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

As you can see, the provider code very closely mirrors our old recipe code, just
using the `new_resource` helper instead of `u`. We can then convert our old bag
item into a recipe:

{% highlight ruby %}
mycompany_user 'asmithee' do
  comment 'Alan Smithee'
  ssh_keys ['ssh-rsa ...']
end
{% endhighlight %}

And again you can see a very tight correlation between the recipe code and the
bag item.
