---
title: "Why I Don't Like GSoC"
published: false
---

That's right, you heard me. I think [Google Summer of Code](http://code.google.com/soc/)
is a waste of time. Why, you ask? Simply put, Google gets far more out of it
than anyone else, and certainly more than the open source community.

To see why, let us break down who is involved in the process:

## The Students

The real bulk of those that are supposed to benefit, and don't get me wrong,
some do. There do exist students that have a great experience, learn much about
real software development, and contribute to the open source community.
Unfortunately this doesn't seem be the majority. Mentorship is highly variable,
many not really having the time to bring someone up to speed on years of
community standards, design policy, and politics. This usually leaves the
student in a very precarious position. Compared to the training and support
a student can get from a good internship, it hardly seems like students come
out ahead in end.

## [The Crazy Ones](http://www.crazyonesquote.com/)

Those that found open source on their own, have been active members in their
respective communities, and probably already have submitted patches to many
projects. Despite all of this, they are still technically students and so
qualify for GSoC. This is nice, but these are also the ones that know where to
look for more direct funding sources (internship from a major user,
[grants](http://www.python.org/psf/grants/),
[crowdfunding](http://pypy.org/py3donate.html)) so the actual benefit is
marginal. There have even been unofficial cases of someone both acting as a
student and mentoring another project at the same time.

## The Mentors

Really the point isn't for the mentors to get much out of GSoC themselves, so
this one is understandable. Moving on ...

## The Projects

GSoC is framed as both a way to give student's real-world experience, but also
as a public good, funding development all over the open-source ecosystem.
Realistically the code that comes out of it all rarely lives up to this
expectation. Programming is a skill you must practice like anything else, so
naturally the first entry foary into real-world software often results in
disorganized, unmaintainable code. Additionally most students don't stick around
after the end of the summer. So in the end each project has a handful of braches
full of very green code, and no maintainers to stand behind them. As with
any similar patch, this is usually a death sentence, or at least a recipe for
limbo.

## Google

So we reach the end, the buck stops here. Google spends a lot money and gets
what? They get a list of hundreds of students, skilled developers that will
generally be looking for work in a year or two. Spending five or ten thousand
to hire a developer is an absolute bargain. This is the true by-product of GSoC,
contact lists on an HR desk.
