---
title: Making Things
---

<blockquote>Braincrack: (n) an idea you would rather plan about than execute.</blockquote>

First used [by Ze Frank](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0sHCQWjTrJ8), braincrack
is one of those ideas that gets lodged in your brain. That you just never quite
get around to creating or executing, but always tell yourself you'll get back to.
Maybe it is your eternally unfinished novel, or maybe a funny site about cats in
sombreros, or maybe it is a complex web application. In the end the problem is often the same,
making things is hard. Let's look at this process both generally and for my
hypothetical cat photosharing site.

# What

At heart everything starts as an idea somewhere, an idea we are committed to not
allow to become the fabled braincrack. Often this is just a given, you have an
idea you want to share with the world but don't know how to proceed. For those that
want to practice but don't have a specific plan, we have
special gatherings that celebrate starting an idea from scratch. Weekend hackathons
have become increasingly common as a marketing vehicle, and online game jams like
[PyWeek](http://pyweek.org/) and [Ludum Dare](http://www.ludumdare.com/) encourage
coming in with nothing but a passion for making things.

In the end, though, ideas are the easy part. Executing every passing concept
would take many lifetimes, filtering down to just the most worthy of time and
attention takes experience that paradoxically only comes from choosing poorly
many times. Make wrong turns, and try to see when to put down your tools and work on
something else for a while.

For my photosharing site I was fortunate to have a serendipitous realization
that the world needs a dedicated place to share photos of cats in sombreros. The
outline from there flows naturally. I can look at existing photosharing sites for
inspiration on the interface, as well as places like [PatternTap](http://patterntap.com/?terms=photo).

# Who

Even the best of concepts generally needs to be grown and honed before you can
jump into building it. Here is where having a social network to tap can truly shine.
Posting your idea to [Reddit](http://reddit.com/) or [Hacker News](http://news.ycombinator.com/)
can get of eyeballs on it (ex. [hyperloop with over 45000 votes](http://www.reddit.com/r/technology/comments/1k8bhi/elon_musk_has_unveiled_new_details_about_the/)),
however it can be both demoralizing and time consuming to tease apart the useful
input from the overwhelming wall of noise.

Organizations like [PyLadies](http://www.pyladies.com/)
have worked hard to create safe spaces to explore new ideas, though these can
be few and far between. Community hackerspaces are also a good place to seek
safe input. I am happy to have seen rapid growth and proliferation in these kinds
of communities, and look forward to them being more available to everyone. To
slightly misquote [John Green, we need to keep "making places where people can fall and get caught"](http://nerdfighteria.info/video/54/STZdi7aTuOU).

Generally when talking about functions within a team (in the context of something
this early in its life cycle) you would hear about three main roles: designer,
developer, and sysadmin. These three silos have far more in common than they
differ, but they do often remain unfortunately far apart. Make sure to balance
your own skills with those of others, and cultivate relationships with as many
other domains and domain experts as you can, your second drafts will thank you.

Back to my brilliant idea. A quick IM with some friends revealed that catsinsombreros.com
was available and is a natural fit. We quickly brainstormed some ideas about how
to run the service and what kind of community it would be. We quickly iterated on a logo to share in the
hopes of rallying others to our cause. All of these things rely on having
a community to work with, that you trust to provide good feedback and be honest
with you.

# Where

If your idea is entirely or largely informational, something you just want to
share with the world, there is now some good news. Between WordPress and Tumblr,
it is easier than ever to launch a site with some quick content. If these don't
address your needs, unfortunately the path ahead drops out from under you very
quickly. Many Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS, ex. [Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/),
[Google App Engine](https://developers.google.com/appengine/))
services offer robust free tiers which can be an enormous boon to a nascent project.
As before though, these services have a very proscribed way of doing things and
deviation will lead to an even sharper drop than last time. After that the next
place to look is generally a public cloud vendor, some of which offer limited
free resources but in general you will have to be willing to put up some money in
one way or another.

Beyond just hosting options there are a lot more moving pieces in just getting
something up where people can see it. Domain registration, DNS configuration,
mail server records, all of these can present serious roadblocks as you need to
integrate many disparate moving pieces.

The emergence of well-supported and clearly defined free tiers has been a colossal
leap forward in allowing people to play with ideas. If you are a service provider
of any kind, I would strongly encourage you to look in to offering one.

For catsinsombreros.com my first stop is my domain registrar, [Hover](http://hover.com/).
My registrar offers free DNS hosting, as do many others, so I don't have to find
a separate host for that though I do have to configure it myself. For an application
this simple, and given that I expect my launch to be small with the current
surplus of photosharing sites I can easily start with a free tier application on
Heroku and either scale up there when my service takes off, or migrate to my own
servers.

# How

<p id="making-how">
<span>HTML, CSS, Javascript, Objective-C, Java, Django, Rails, Express, Chef, Puppet, Ansible,</span>
<span style="font-size: 80%;">Fabric, Nagios, Graphite, PagerDuty, Git, Logstash, NPM, Rubygems, Bunder, Pip, Setuptools, PyPy, Nginx, HAProxy,</span>
<span style="font-size: 60%;">Apache, Linux, Docker, Illumos, FPM, Omnibus, ZooKeeper, Subversion, Mercurial, Perl, C, Python, Ruby, PHP, Go, Scala, Clojure, Postgres, MySQL,</span>
<span style="font-size: 40%;">Redis, Riak, MongoDB, EC2, Rackspace, OpenStack, HTTP, TLS, bcrypt, SHA2, HMAC, OAuth, REST, Jenkins, Travis, Sublime Text, Vim, Emacs, TextMate, Twitter, Facebook, Google+, Reddit, Hacker News, Marketing, Sales, Support.</span>
</p>

We have built an astonishing number of tools, frameworks, and communities around
making things with computers. This is not an indictment of any of them, but the
fact remains that mastering even a small subset can take decades, by which point
your skills will surely be outdated. Most people, myself included, advocate one
particular stack of tools or another, sometimes to the point of dogma and fanaticism.
Ignore us, all of us. Do it wrong, ruin your first deploy because you forgot to
rebuild your CSS, get woken up at 3AM because you didn't setup automatic fail-over on your
database, but get something up there.

Will you regret not doing it the "right way" during that 3AM outage when your
customers or friends are annoyed at you? Absolutely, but you will regret doing
nothing far more, and the world will be lesser for it. Don't forget all those
pain points either, share them, make sure we all keep talking about them so when
it is the next maker's turn, they have an easier time of it.

For my site I can pick some simple components to build up from. Heroku provides
a hosted Postgres database, so that is a natural fit for data storage. For storing
the actual pictures I can use Amazon S3, and for the web application I can use Django.
There is a lot not covered in this, things like SSL or monitoring or off-site backups
can realistically wait until after the main site is up and running, but be sure
you don't leave it for too long or you are in for one of those nasty 3AM phone calls.

## The Exception

In a complete 180 from the above, there is one place where "don't worry, just
fail" can't usually apply: security. While you don't have to immediately deploy
TLS Perfect Forward Secrecy or DNSSEC, you do need a certain baseline to ensure
you don't put data from users at risk. One option is to just not have any data
from users, thus sidestepping any hazards. Another is to make use of the password
and user data storage options in a popular framework, which often gives you the
current best practices for things like key derivation functions. Unfortunately
getting experienced help with internet security concerns can be very difficult,
even I only have a few resources so my only suggestion is that if you are at all
unsure if you are about to do something unsafe please [ask me](https://twitter.com/kantrn).
I don't claim to be an expert, but hopefully I can point you at one if needed.

# When

Now. Let go of the braincrack. It won't be perfect the first time around, or
probably even all that good, but it will be real. Only there can you start the
journey towards awesomeness.

# Why

I am a maker, and I think you should be too. I can't help you write that novel
or finish that painting, but I can help you put all these and more on the internet.
As time goes on, we are moving closer and closer to ideas being the true currency
of the world, but an idea must be made manifest before you can show it to others.
One of the original goals of the [OLPC](http://laptop.org/) was to create a whole
generation of makers, to unleash upon the world children that had no preconceptions
about it being difficult to make and share things across the room or around the world.
Much progress has been made, and we build on the shoulders of giants.

-----

As I lead off with, making things is hard. Specifically of interest to me is that launching a website is
at least an order of magnitude harder than it needs to be. I am going to fix this. If you want to fix this too,
maybe you should <a href="&#x6d;&#97;&#x69;&#108;&#x74;&#111;&#x3a;&#110;&#111;&#x61;&#104;&#x40;&#x63;&#x6f;&#x64;&#101;&#114;&#x61;&#110;&#103;&#101;&#x72;&#46;&#110;&#x65;&#x74;?subject=Work with me">hire me</a>.
